ins(fix): add dns ipv6 only fixing guide (#2639)
scaleway/docs-content: compute/instances/troubleshooting/fix-dns-routed-ipv6-only-debian-bullseye.mdx

---
meta:
  title: Fixing DNS resolution with a routed IPv6-only setup on Debian Bullseye
  description: This page helps you to fix DNS resolution with a routed IPv6-only setup on Debian Bullseye
content:
  h1: Fixing DNS resolution with a routed IPv6-only setup on Debian Bullseye
  paragraph: This page helps you to fix DNS resolution with a routed IPv6-only setup on Debian Bullseye
tags: dns ipv6 Instance debian bullseye
dates:
  validation: 2024-01-23
  posted: 2024-01-23
categories:
  - compute
---

> This guide outlines the steps to enable DNS resolution on a Scaleway Instance that uses the Debian Bullseye image, configured with one or more routed IPv6 addresses while lacking any IPv4 addresses.

Reviewer: > while lacking any IPv4 addresses.

I think that the wording is misleading, because the verb _to lack_ suggests that it should be there.

```suggestion
This guide outlines the steps to enable DNS resolution on a Scaleway Instance that uses the Debian Bullseye image, configured with one or more routed IPv6 addresses and without any IPv4 addresses.
```

<Message type="requirement">
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [an Instance](/compute/Instances/how-to/create-an-Instance) running Debian Bullseye (11) with an IPv6-only setup
</Message>

<Message type="important">

>     This guide explains how to switch from the traditional `ifupdown` toolset to the modern `netplan`, which is used in recent Debian releases. The process is straightforward if your Instance is using the default network configuration provided by Scaleway metadata. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This guide explains how to switch from the traditional `ifupdown` toolset to the more modern `netplan` solution, which is used in recent Debian releases. The process is straightforward if your Instance is using the default network configuration provided by Scaleway metadata. 
```

For some reason, this configuration method does not seem to play nicely with SLAAC's DNS advertisements. This results in an absence of DNS resolver configuration, thus breaking most of the network activities.

Due to its modern nature and active maintenance, [`netplan` is a favorable option for configuring cloud systems](https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/debian-reference/ch05.en.html#_the_modern_network_configuration_for_cloud) and conveniently addresses the current issue. However, in alignment with our image building policy, which aims to minimize alterations to the official upstream cloud image, `netplan` is intentionally not enabled by default in Scaleway's Debian Bullseye image.

## Checking if your Instance is concerned

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a note about the requirement of having the CLI installed, and a link to a documentation about how to install it.

<Message type="note">
    All steps below require super-user (`root`) privileges.
</Message>

1. Force `cloud-init` to setup the network configuration using `netplan`.
    ```sh
    > /etc/cloud/cloud.cfg.d/99_scw_ip6dns.cfg cat <<EOF
    system_info:
    network:
        renderers: [netplan, eni]
        activators: [netplan, eni]
    EOF
    ```
2. Remove any `ifupdown` configuration from `cloud-init`.
    ```
    rm -f /etc/network/interfaces.d/50-cloud-init
    ```
3. *(optional)* Port your custom `ifupdown` configuration (if any) to `netplan`.
    <Message type="tip">
        Refer to the [Debian NetworkConfiguration wiki](https://wiki.debian.org/NetworkConfiguration) and the [`netplan` documentation](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) if required.
    </Message>
4. Enable the necessary `systemd` units:
    ```sh
    systemctl enable systemd-networkd-wait-online.service systemd-resolved.service
    ```
5. Reboot the Instance.
    ```
    reboot
    ```
6. Connect back to the Instance and ensure that you have DNS resolving working:
    ```
    host -W3 google.com
    ```

> 7. *(optional)* It is strongly recommended that you upgrade `scaleway-ecosystem` package to at least version `0.0.6-10`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. *(optional)* It is strongly recommended that you upgrade the `scaleway-ecosystem` package to at least version `0.0.6-10`.
```

  description: This page helps you to fix DNS resolution with a routed IPv6-only setup on Debian Bullseye
content:
  h1: Fixing DNS resolution with a routed IPv6-only setup on Debian Bullseye
  paragraph: This page helps you to fix DNS resolution with a routed IPv6-only setup on Debian Bullseye
tags: dns ipv6 Instance debian bullseye
dates:
  validation: 2024-01-23
  posted: 2024-01-23
categories:
  - compute
---

This guide outlines the steps to enable DNS resolution on a Scaleway Instance that uses the Debian Bullseye image, configured with one or more routed IPv6 addresses while lacking any IPv4 addresses.

<Message type="requirement">
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [an Instance](/compute/Instances/how-to/create-an-Instance) running Debian Bullseye (11) with an IPv6-only setup
</Message>

<Message type="important">
    This guide explains how to switch from the traditional `ifupdown` toolset to the modern `netplan`, which is used in recent Debian releases. The process is straightforward if your Instance is using the default network configuration provided by Scaleway metadata. 

>     However, if your Instance has a customized network setup, please ensure you are comfortable with both `ifupdown` and `netplan` before proceeding. You can safely apply this procedure to a newly created Instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    However, if your Instance has a customized network setup, ensure you are comfortable with both `ifupdown` and `netplan` before proceeding. You can safely apply this procedure to a newly created Instance.
```

</Message>

## Technical explanation

> When a Scaleway Instance uses routed IP addresses, the IPv6 stack is configured automatically using [`SLAAC`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4862). With this method, the Instance is periodically advertised of various network configuration details, including the addresses of DNS servers that it should be using. The Instance is then free to consume these advertisements or not. By default, the operating system images provided by Scaleway are configured to leverage these advertisements to configure the IPv6 networking and the related DNS servers. The Debian Bullseye image is no exception.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a Scaleway Instance uses routed IP addresses, the IPv6 stack is automatically configured using [`SLAAC`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4862). With this method, the Instance is periodically advertised with various network configuration details, including the DNS server addresses it should use. The Instance is then free to consume these advertisements or not. By default, the operating system images provided by Scaleway are configured to leverage these advertisements to configure the IPv6 networking and the related DNS servers. The Debian Bullseye image is no exception.
```

> When configuring the network at boot time, the `cloud-init` software is in charge of detecting the appropriate network configuration method used by the system at hand, then to write and/or apply the needed configuration files/parameters according to this detected method. On Debian Bullseye, and because of [`cloud-init`'s built-in order of detection](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/network-config.html#network-output-policy), the primarily detected method is [ENI](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/network-config-format-eni.html), which configures the network through Debian's well known `/etc/network/interfaces*` set of files, along with the `ifupdown` toolset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When configuring the network at boot time, the `cloud-init` software detects the appropriate network configuration method used by the system at hand and write and/or apply the necessary configuration files/parameters. On Debian Bullseye, and because of [`cloud-init`'s built-in order of detection](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/network-config.html#network-output-policy), the primarily detected method is [ENI](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/network-config-format-eni.html), which configures the network through Debian's well known `/etc/network/interfaces*` set of files, along with the `ifupdown` toolset.
```

For some reason, this configuration method does not seem to play nicely with SLAAC's DNS advertisements. This results in an absence of DNS resolver configuration, thus breaking most of the network activities.

> Due to its modern nature and active maintenance, [`netplan` is a favorable option for configuring cloud systems](https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/debian-reference/ch05.en.html#_the_modern_network_configuration_for_cloud) and conveniently addresses the current issue. However, in alignment with our image building policy, which aims to minimize alterations to the official upstream cloud image, `netplan` is intentionally not enabled by default in Scaleway's Debian Bullseye image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to its modern nature and active maintenance, [`netplan` is a favorable option for configuring cloud systems](https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/debian-reference/ch05.en.html#_the_modern_network_configuration_for_cloud) and conveniently addresses the current issue. However, in alignment with our image building policy, which aims to minimize alterations to the official upstream cloud image, `netplan` is intentionally disabled by default in Scaleway's Debian Bullseye image.
```

Reviewer: I stand to disagree with this suggestion, as it is not _disabled_ by simply _not enabled_.

Author: @jcirinosclwy I agree with @NoSuchCommand here. We should keep it as _not enabled_.

## Checking if your Instance is concerned

You can check whether your Debian Bullseye Instance is concerned by running the following command, where `UUID` is the identifier of your Instance:

```sh
scw -o json Instance server get UUID | jq '.routed_ip_enabled and ([.public_ips[] | select(.family != "inet6")] == [])'
```

The command will output:

> * `true` if the Instance is concerned by the present procedure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `true` if the Instance is concerned by the present procedure.
```

* `false` otherwise

<Message type="note">
    The above command must only be run against a Debian Bullseye Instance. It does not check for this condition itself.
</Message>

## Installing netplan

> The `netplan` package needs to be installed **before** you apply this procedure. If you try to apply this procedure to an Instance where `netplan` is not installed, it will fail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `netplan` package must be installed **before** you apply this procedure, or it will fail.
```

<Message type="tip">
    Latest Debian Bullseye images from Scaleway ship with `netplan` pre-installed.
</Message>

### Checking for netplan

To check whether your Instance has `netplan` installed, run the following command:
    ```sh
    dpkg-query -W netplan.io
    ````
The command should return an output like this, where `<VERSION>` is the currently installed version of the package, meaning you can skip directly to the first step of the procedure:
    ```sh
    netplan.io	<VERSION>
    ```
If the tool is not installed, the command will print the following:
    ```sh
    dpkg-query: no packages found matching netplan.io
    ````
In this situation, proceed with the next section to install `netplan` before applying the procedure.

### Installing the tool

<Message type="note">
    All steps below require super-user (`root`) privileges.
</Message>

> 1. *(optional)** If, **and only if**,  your Instance is already booted using a routed IPv6-only setup, you need to temporarily configure your DNS resolver so that it can reach the Debian repositories, in order to install `netplan`. The following uses Google's DNS server:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Optionally, if, **and only if**, your Instance is already booted using a routed IPv6-only setup, you must temporarily configure your DNS resolver so it can reach the Debian repositories and install `netplan`. The following uses Google's DNS server:
```

Reviewer: IMO, having a specifically emphasized _(optional)_ keyword mention at the very start of the line, rather than a bare word in the sentence, allows for the optional nature of the step to stand out in the list.

Reviewer 2: @NoSuchCommand This is international, so users can quickly scan which steps are mandatory or not, and get their desired action completed fast. If strategically it can be an issue, we can replace the word.

Reviewer: That's exactly my point. Having a clear typographic emphasis helps the said quick scan. On the other hand, having this melted into the sentence as any other word makes it look like a regular step at first glance.

Reviewer 2: @NoSuchCommand Thank you for your input. We have discussed it within the team and, for consistency purposes, we will stick with the word without brackets.

    ```sh
    > /etc/resolv.conf cat <<EOF
    nameserver 2001:4860:4860::8888
    EOF
    ```

> 2. Update your packages lists

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Update your packages lists:
```

    ```
    apt-get update
    ```

> 3. Install `netplan`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Install `netplan`:
```

    ```
    apt-get -y install netplan.io
    ```

## Fixing the DNS resolution issue

If your Instance is concerned by the DNS resolution issue, follow the following procedure to fix it.

<Message type="note">
    All steps below require super-user (`root`) privileges.
</Message>

1. Force `cloud-init` to setup the network configuration using `netplan`.
```sh
> /etc/cloud/cloud.cfg.d/99_scw_ip6dns.cfg cat <<EOF
system_info:
  network:
    renderers: [netplan, eni]
    activators: [netplan, eni]
EOF
```
2. Remove any `ifupdown` configuration from `cloud-init`.
```
rm -f /etc/network/interfaces.d/50-cloud-init
```

> 3. *(optional)* Port your custom `ifupdown` configuration (if any) to `netplan`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Optionally, port your custom `ifupdown` configuration (if any) to `netplan`.
```

    <Message type="tip">
        Refer to the [Debian NetworkConfiguration wiki](https://wiki.debian.org/NetworkConfiguration) and the [`netplan` documentation](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) if required.
    </Message>
4. Enable the necessary `systemd` units:
    ```sh
    systemctl enable systemd-networkd-wait-online.service systemd-resolved.service
    ```

> 5. Reboot the Instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Reboot the Instance:
```

    ```
    reboot
    ```

> 6. Connect back to the Instance and ensure that you have DNS resolving working:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Connect back to the Instance and ensure you have DNS resolving working:
```

    ```
    host -W3 google.com
    ```

> 7. *(optional)* It is strongly recommended that you upgrade `scaleway-ecosystem` package to at least version `0.0.6-10`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Optionally, it is strongly recommended that you upgrade `scaleway-ecosystem` package to at least version `0.0.6-10`.
```

Reviewer: Same advice here.

</Message>

<Message type="important">
    This guide explains how to switch from the traditional `ifupdown` toolset to the more modern `netplan` solution, which is used in recent Debian releases. The process is straightforward if your Instance is using the default network configuration provided by Scaleway metadata. 
    However, if your Instance has a customized network setup, ensure you are comfortable with both `ifupdown` and `netplan` before proceeding. You can safely apply this procedure to a newly created Instance.
</Message>

## Technical explanation

When a Scaleway Instance uses routed IP addresses, the IPv6 stack is automatically configured using [`SLAAC`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4862). With this method, the Instance is periodically advertised with various network configuration details, including the DNS server addresses it should use. The Instance is then free to consume these advertisements or not. By default, the operating system images provided by Scaleway are configured to leverage these advertisements to configure the IPv6 networking and the related DNS servers. The Debian Bullseye image is no exception.

> When configuring the network at boot time, the `cloud-init` software detects the appropriate network configuration method used by the system at hand and write and/or apply the necessary configuration files/parameters. On Debian Bullseye, and because of [`cloud-init`'s built-in order of detection](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/network-config.html#network-output-policy), the primarily detected method is [ENI](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/network-config-format-eni.html), which configures the network through Debian's well known `/etc/network/interfaces*` set of files, along with the `ifupdown` toolset.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When configuring the network at boot time, the `cloud-init` software detects the appropriate network configuration method used by the system at hand and writes and/or applies the necessary configuration files/parameters. On Debian Bullseye, and because of [`cloud-init`'s built-in order of detection](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/network-config.html#network-output-policy), the primary detected method is [ENI](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/network-config-format-eni.html), which configures the network through Debian's well known `/etc/network/interfaces*` set of files, along with the `ifupdown` toolset.
```

> For some reason, this configuration method does not seem to play nicely with SLAAC's DNS advertisements. This results in an absence of DNS resolver configuration, thus breaking most of the network activities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This configuration method does not interact well with SLAAC's DNS advertisements. This results in an absence of DNS resolver configuration, thus breaking most of the network activities.
```

    ```sh
    dpkg-query -W netplan.io
    ````
The command should return an output like this, where `<VERSION>` is the currently installed version of the package, meaning you can skip directly to the first step of the procedure:
    ```sh
    netplan.io	<VERSION>
    ```
If the tool is not installed, the command will print the following:
    ```sh
    dpkg-query: no packages found matching netplan.io
    ````
In this situation, proceed with the next section to install `netplan` before applying the procedure.

### Installing the tool

<Message type="note">
    All steps below require super-user (`root`) privileges.
</Message>

1. *(optional)** If, **and only if**,  your Instance is already booted using a routed IPv6-only setup, you need to temporarily configure your DNS resolver so that it can reach the Debian repositories, in order to install `netplan`. The following uses Google's DNS server:
    ```sh
    > /etc/resolv.conf cat <<EOF
    nameserver 2001:4860:4860::8888
    EOF
    ```

2. Update your packages lists:
    ```
    apt-get update
    ```
3. Install `netplan`:
    ```
    apt-get -y install netplan.io
    ```

## Fixing the DNS resolution issue

> If your Instance is concerned by the DNS resolution issue, follow the following procedure to fix it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your Instance is concerned by the DNS resolution issue, follow the procedure below to fix it.
```

<Message type="note">
    All steps below require super-user (`root`) privileges.
</Message>

> 1. Force `cloud-init` to setup the network configuration using `netplan`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Force `cloud-init` to set up the network configuration using `netplan`.
```

    ```sh
    > /etc/cloud/cloud.cfg.d/99_scw_ip6dns.cfg cat <<EOF
    system_info:
    network:
        renderers: [netplan, eni]
        activators: [netplan, eni]
    EOF
    ```
2. Remove any `ifupdown` configuration from `cloud-init`.
    ```
    rm -f /etc/network/interfaces.d/50-cloud-init
    ```
3. Optionally, port your custom `ifupdown` configuration (if any) to `netplan`.
    <Message type="tip">
        Refer to the [Debian NetworkConfiguration wiki](https://wiki.debian.org/NetworkConfiguration) and the [`netplan` documentation](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) if required.
    </Message>
4. Enable the necessary `systemd` units:
    ```sh
    systemctl enable systemd-networkd-wait-online.service systemd-resolved.service
    ```
5. Reboot the Instance:
    ```
    reboot
    ```

> 6. Connect back to the Instance and ensure you have DNS resolving working:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. Reconnect to the Instance and ensure DNS resolution is working:
```
